— Assignment 2 —
The Backpropagation Algorithm

Tommy Löfstedt, Polina Kurtser, and Brendan Michael

Deadline on April 28, 2026

Now you probably understand conceptually how gradient descent works
(if not yet, the slides from Lecture 5 might help), but how do we actually
get a hold of the gradient? That should hopefully become more clear after
this assignment.

We have created a small machine learning library based on Jax, that is
able to automatically compute the Jacobians of each layer separately (deriva-
tives of the layer outputs with respect to the layer inputs and layer parame-
ters). However, it is currently not able to jointly compute the partial deriva-
tives of the loss function with respect to each layer’s inputs and parameters
in the hypothesis function. This is now your task.

We provide the machine learning library, jaxon, and a skeleton Python
file in which you need to implement the backpropagation step of the back-
propagation algorithm. These files are found in the provided zip file. Hint:
To solve this assignment efficiently, look up the function jax.numpy.einsum.

We also provide two small datasets, one for regression (in the numpy
file regression_data.npz) and one for classification (in the numpy file
classification_data.npz). Once you have implemented the backpropa-
gation step, and thus have all partial derivatives, you should first setup a
linear regression model with a mean squared loss function and train it using
your derivatives on the regression data; second, you should setup a small neu-
ral network with at least one hidden layer, with a categorical cross-entropy
loss, and train it using your derivatives on the classification data. For this
you need to implement the descent step of gradient descent, e.g.,

(s+1) (s)
W (

l = Wl − ρ∇ (s)ℓ(θ s)),
Wl

1



where (s)
Wl would be, e.g., dense weights in layer l at iteration s, the ρ is

the learning rate, ∇ (s)ℓ is the gradient of the loss with respect to the dense
Wl

weights in layer l, and θ(s) represents all model parameters. The descent step
needs to be taken for all model parameters like this.

You need to implement the backward method in the provided skeleton
Models. It should return a dictionary of dictionaries in the following format:

• The dictionary contains an entry for each layer, e.g., grad["dense1"]

– The loss function’s entry need to have the key "loss", e.g., grad[
"loss"]

– The layers’s entries need to have as key their given names (note
that you build up your hypothesis function in Example 2 using
Hypothesis.add("name", layer))

• Each layer’s entry is a dictionary with partial derivatives for its weights
and inputs

– The key for the partial derivatives with respect to the layer in-
puts need to be called "inputs" and be in a list, e.g., grad[
"dense1"]["inputs"] would be a list.

– The key for the partial derivatives with respect to the layer’s
weights have the names given to those weights, e.g., grad[
"dense1"]["W"]. Note: This is a Jax array for model weights,
and not a list as with the inputs.

Note: This is the same format as the model parameters are stored in, which
you find in model.params. This may be helpful when you implement the gra-
dient descent steps as well. The test function, jaxon.test.model_backward(
model, X, Y), assumes this format, and will not work unless it is correct.

It is ok to hard-code the backward steps in your solution (with respect
to the number of layers and their names), but it is a very good exercise to
make it more general. Can you make your solution work even for arbitrary
compute graphs?

Your implementation will likely work in most recent versions of Jax, but
it should run in the provided environment on the CS systems to pass the
assignment. Jax is installed with the provided Anaconda environment, which
you activate as follows:

2



$ conda-activate

$ conda activate 5dv236vt26

Jax may tell you that it can’t find a GPU. If so, that’s not a problem for this
assignment, as you don’t need a GPU here.

You must implement the backpropagation steps yourselves. It is not allowed
to use someone else’s implementation, and you cannot use Jax to do it auto-
matically for you. I.e., you can not use autodiff (e.g., jax.grad(...)), but
need to implement the Jacobian–vector products yourself. Please also take
note of the course’s “AI” policy, which is stated on the course web page1.

What to hand in:

• The skeleton file, filled in with your implementation of backward and
gradient descent for the two examples.

• A short report in PDF format (follow the template given below) that
contains:

– A short description of your solution (about 1/3 to 1/2 page).
– Figures with the loss curves for your training loss of the two mod-

els.

Don’t hesitate to contact us, either through email, the course web discussion
board, or at the lectures, if you have any questions!

Good luck, and have fun!

1https://www.canvas.umu.se/courses/20985

3



Assignment 2: Report Template
Student Name:
CS username:

Solution Description
Give a short description (about 1/3 to 1/2 page) of your solution. Include
the following in your description:

• An outline of how the backpropagation step was implemented.

• An outline of how you implemented gradient descent.

Learning Curves

Gradient Descent on a Linear Regression Model

20

15

10

5

0
25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200

Epoch

Figure 1: Sample learning curve for the training loss of linear regression.

4

Loss value



Gradient Descent on a Neural Network for Multiclass Classification
13

12

11

10

9

25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
Epoch

Figure 2: Sample learning curve for the training loss of the neural network.

5

Loss value